We can implement user authentication for our application in a variety of
different ways, but the standard is to use tokens. And Laravel Sanctum makes it
very easy to use tokens within your application. Now, I don't mean to imply
that we are using Sanctum just because it's easy. I mean, yes, that is a very big
reason why we are using it, but it's also perfect for our needs because we can
easily create tokens for users, we can assign abilities to tokens, which we will
look at in a later episode, and that will give us the ability to control what
users can and can't do. But also, very importantly, it's installed. We don't have
to do anything because whenever we created our project, Sanctum was
installed as well. So, all we really need to do is provide the ability for users
to sign in, and then we can create a token for them. So, let's start by
creating a login request. So, we will use Artisan to make a request. We'll call it
API slash login user request, and let's go ahead and write the validation rules
for that request. Now, since I prefixed it with API, it is automatically in the API
namespace as well as the API folder. So, we're good to go as far as our structure
is concerned. Let's change the authorize to return true because if it's false,
users won't be able to sign in at all. And then for our validation rules, we will
have an email. So, we want to make sure that it is required and that it is a
string. We can also say that it is a valid email address. And then we also
need to validate the password, which is almost the same. It needs to be required
and a string, but let's say that it needs to have a minimum characters of eight,
and that's going to be good enough, I think, for us. So, with that done,
we need to go to our AuthController. Now, our AuthController we created before we
started designing our API. So, I want to move the AuthController into the API
folder because the authentication for our API would be different from our normal web
application. So, inside of here then, we need to make a few changes. The namespace
is now API. We need to use app HTTP controllers and then controller. And we
also need to update that inside of our route file. So, let's go to api.php and we
just need to add the API to the namespace, and that should fix that. So,
now for our login method, we want to accept the login user request. And the
first thing we need to do is validate that data. So, we will use request
validated, and we want to validate all of the request data. And if we have valid
data, then we want to attempt to authenticate the user. So, we will call
the attempt method, and then we will pass in only the email and the password. Now,
if this fails, we need to tell the client that authentication failed. So, we have
our traits for our API responses, but currently we only have successful
responses. Let's have an error response. Let's copy the success and change the
name to error. And really, except for having a default value for status code, I
think that that is going to be just fine. We still have the message, the status, and
everything is good there. So, when the authentication fails, then we will call
our error, and we'll just say invalid credentials. And then for the HTTP status
code, we'll say 401 for unauthorized. But if authentication is successful, then we
need to fetch the user from the database. So, let's call first where the email is
the same as the email provided in the request, and then we will return an okay
response. But we also need to include the token here. So, we're going to need to
change our API response just a little bit so that we can have the message. But then
let's also say that we will pass data in as well, which means we will need to
modify the success method, which should be fine. We'll just add the data, and that
will be simply data. So, that should be fine. Let's go back to our auth controller.
So, the message will simply say authenticated, and then we will have our
data. Our data will have a token key, and this is where we will have the user
object to create our token. Now, we need to supply a name for our token, and the
name is really arbitrary. And this would be something that the user would assign
if we had a profile page and they created a token, they could give it their own name.
They don't really have that capability here. We might could add that in with the
login request, but I don't see a need to do that. So, it really doesn't matter what
this name is. So, we'll just say API token four, and then we will concatenate the
user's email address. And then from here, this is going to return a hashed value.
So, we want the plain text token. So, we should be able to make this request, get the
token that we will then use for all of our other requests, and that's how we will
authenticate the user for every request. So, let's go to Postman, and let's go to the
login request. And we need to change some of these, although we need an actual user.
So, let's go to the database, and let's just pick one of these. This first one looks kind
of easy, this jcos at example.com. So, let's sign in as them, and the password is simply
password. Let's check our headers, make sure that we are sending the accept header we are.
So, let's send this. We should get a response back, and there it is. We have our data, we have
our token. So, this value right here is important. We are sending this to the user, and this is the
token that they are going to include with every request going forward. This is how we will
authenticate the incoming requests. So, if a request doesn't have this token, then they won't
be able to access whatever it is that we want to protect. So, let's look at how we can protect
a route. So, let's go to our v1 routes, and let's just say that for right now, we're going to be
sure that only authenticated users can access the tickets endpoint. So, we can easily do that
by calling route middleware. We will specify the auth sanctum middleware, and then we will call
api resource. So, this is going to ensure that in order to access our tickets resources, the request
has to include a sanctum token. So, how do we do that then? Well, let's go to our tickets request.
Let's go to our headers, and let's add the accept header. The value will be application
slash json. Let's go ahead, and let's just send that request. We will get a response back saying
unauthenticated, but to show that we are authenticated, let's go to authorization here,
and we are going to set the type to a bearer token. We will paste in the token value that we got
whenever we signed in. Let's go ahead and save this, and whenever we send this request now,
we will see that we get the response that we were hoping for. We get all of our tickets. So,
the only time that the user will need to provide their email address and their password is whenever
they sign in hitting the login endpoint. They will get that token that the client will then
need to include as a bearer token for every request. That sounds cumbersome, but that's
just how it is. That's a whole lot easier than having to send email and password for
every request going forward. In the next episode, we will look at how to revoke those tokens.